---
layout: post
title: Nonself, Callosectomies, and Kripke
excerpt: A Short Thought on the Philosophy of Conciousness
---

#Nonself, Callosectomies, and Kripke

A patient's brain can be physically [servered in half](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corpus_callosotomy), making it impossible for each half to communicate with the other. Many people think this would also split the identity of the patient as well, but instead people who undergo this surgery retain a single identity for themselves despite the clear physical separation of the hardware that runs their conciousness into two parts. 

The self doesn't come from a centalized process. It's emergent in the parallel way the brain works. It's even tempting to call it [an illusion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anatta).

The singularity of the self seems to be assumed in so many conversations about it. I first noticed this when reading "Naming and Necessity" by Kripke. Kripke gives an example of how an a-priori fact such as whether or not a number is prime can be learned by observing the result of a computer program. He argues that this is an example of how an a-priori truth can be learned by observation rather than pure reasoning. 

When I write and run a program to calculate whether some number is prime, I am not making an observation. I am essentially just doing the computation that I would do in my head, but on the machine. My brain runs in parallel and I am leverging the machine just as my brain leverages certain specialized parts of my brain for image processing or other common tasks. If it is otherwise, then what privileges different parts of my brian to be part of me and not the computer?

When I do this, I have to make the assumption that the computer isn't fradulent, but don't we make this same assumption about ourselves when we assume that we are all sane?
